Docs, part 18 (#507)
yiisoft/validator: docs/guide/conditional-validation.md

# Conditional validation

## `skipOnError`

By default, if an error occurred during validation of an attribute, further rules for this attribute are processed. To

> change this behavior, use `skipOnError: true` when configuring rules:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
change this behavior for a certain rule, use `skipOnError: true` when configuring it:
```

```php
use Yiisoft\Validator\Rule\Number;

new Number(asInteger: true, max: 100, skipOnError: true)
```

## `skipOnEmpty`

By default, missing and empty values are validated (if the value is missing, it's considered `null`). That is
undesirable if you need a field to be optional. To change this behavior, use `skipOnEmpty: true`.

Note that not every rule has this option, but only the ones that implement `Yiisoft\Validator\SkipOnEmptyInterface`. For
example, `Required` rule doesn't. For more details see "Requiring values" section.

```php
use Yiisoft\Validator\Rule\Number;

new Number(asInteger: true, max: 100, skipOnEmpty: true);
```

> What exactly to consider to be empty is vague and can vary depending on a scope of usage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What exactly to consider to be empty can vary depending on a scope of usage.
```

`skipOnEmpty` value is normalized to callback automatically:

- If `skipOnEmpty` is `false` or `null`, `Yiisoft\Validator\EmptyCriteria\NeverEmpty` is used automatically as
  callback - every value is considered non-empty and validated without skipping (default).
- If `skipOnEmpty` is `true`, `Yiisoft\Validator\EmptyCriteria\WhenEmpty` is used automatically for callback -
  only passed and non-empty values (not `null`, `[]`, or `''`) are validated.
- If custom callback  is set, it's used to determine emptiness.

> Using first option is usually good for HTML forms. The second one is more suitable for APIs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using `false` is usually good for HTML forms. `true` is more suitable for APIs.
```

> The empty values can be also limited to `null` only:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Empty values can be also limited to `null` only:
```

use Yiisoft\Validator\EmptyCriteria\WhenNull;

new Number(asInteger: true, max: 100, skipOnEmpty: new WhenNull());
```

For even more customization you can use your own class implementing `__invoke()` magic method:

```php
use Yiisoft\Validator\Rule\Number;

final class SkipOnZero
{
    public function __invoke(mixed $value, bool $isAttributeMissing): bool
    {
        return $value === 0;
    }
}

new Number(asInteger: true, max: 100, skipOnEmpty: new SkipOnZero());
```

or just a callable:

```php
use Yiisoft\Validator\Rule\Number;

new Number(
    asInteger: true, 
    max: 100, 
    skipOnEmpty: static function (mixed $value, bool $isAttributeMissing): bool {
        return $value === 0;
    }
);
```

For multiple rules this can be also set more conveniently at validator level:

```php
use Yiisoft\Validator\RuleHandlerResolver\SimpleRuleHandlerContainer;
use Yiisoft\Validator\Validator;

$validator = new Validator(new SimpleRuleHandlerContainer(), skipOnEmpty: true);
$validator = new Validator(
    new SimpleRuleHandlerContainer(),
    skipOnEmpty: static function (mixed $value, bool $isAttributeMissing): bool {
        return $value === 0;
    }
);
```

> Using `$isAttributeMissing` parameter such as `$context` also allows to check if attribute is missing / present:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using `$isAttributeMissing` parameter such as `$context` also allows to check whether attribute is missing or present:
```

```php
$skipOnEmpty = static function (mixed $value, bool $isAttributeMissing): bool {
    return $isAttributeMissing || $value === '';
};
```

## `when`

In some cases there is a need to apply rule conditionally. It could be performed by using `when`:

```php
use Yiisoft\Validator\Rule\Number;
use Yiisoft\Validator\ValidationContext;

new Number(
    when: static function ($value, ValidationContext $context): bool {
        return $context->getDataSet()->getAttributeValue('country') === Country::USA;
    },
    asInteger: true, 
    min: 100
);
```

> If callable returns `true` rule is applied, when the value returned is `false`, rule is skipped.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the callable returns `true`, the rule is applied. When the value returned is `false`, rule is skipped.
```

        return $isAttributeMissing || $value === 0;
    }
);
```

Using the class has a benefit of the code reuse possibility.

### Using the same non-default empty criteria for all the rules

For multiple rules this can be also set more conveniently at the validator level:

```php
use Yiisoft\Validator\RuleHandlerResolver\SimpleRuleHandlerContainer;
use Yiisoft\Validator\Validator;

$validator = new Validator(skipOnEmpty: true); // Using the shortcut.
$validator = new Validator(
    new SimpleRuleHandlerContainer(),
    // Using the custom callback.
    skipOnEmpty: static function (mixed $value, bool $isAttributeMissing): bool {
        return $value === 0;
    }
);
```

### Configuring empty criterias in other rules

Some rules, like `Required` can't be skipped on empty values - that would violate the whole purpose of it. However, the 
empty criteria can be configured here too - not for skipping, but for detecting an empty value:

```php
use Yiisoft\Validator\Rule\Required;

$rule = new Required(
    emptyCriteria: static function (mixed $value, bool $isAttributeMissing): bool {
        return $isAttributeMissing || $value === '';
    },
);
```

> It's also possible to set it globally for all rules at the handler level via `RequiredHandler::$defaultEmptyCriteria`.

Author: An example could be helpful, maybe in a different section with the link.

Author: Added to TODO list (optional).

Author: Decided to add this section in a separate PR.
